IEEE SENSORS JOURNAL, VOL. XX, NO. XX, XXXX 2024
1
Adv-DARTS: Robustness Enhancement
Framework Based on Adversarial Differentiable
Architecture Search
Jianwei Tai, Cheng Qian, Shuangning Yang and Kun Jing
Abstract— Deep neural networks have become a pivotal compo-
nent in modern embedded systems for smart sensing. However,
their vulnerability to adversarial examples poses a severe threat
to applications deployed in safety-critical edge domains. Currently,
adversarial training is the dominant defense strategy against adver-
sarial attacks. Nevertheless, standard adversarial training typically
optimizes parameters on fixed, manually designed architectures,
overlooking the impact of the architecture itself on robustness.
On the other hand, neural architecture search, represented by
differentiable architecture search, automates the design of high-
performance model architectures. Yet, differentiable architecture
search strategies optimize almost exclusively for accuracy on clean
samples. Their search process fails to incorporate robustness considerations. Consequently, the discovered architectures
lack robustness, and their reliability in safety-critical applications cannot be guaranteed. To address these limitations, we
propose Adversarial Differentiable Architecture Search. It mainly consists of two components: a neural architecture search
strategy based on an adversarial consistency penalty, and an adversarial training pipeline. The core of the proposed
framework lies in integrating adversarial examples into the neural architecture search process, thereby further enhancing
the effectiveness of adversarial training. Experimental results demonstrate that our approach significantly improves the
adversarial robustness of models. This provides a more stable and reliable decision-making foundation for intelligent
embedded sensing systems.
Index Terms— Adversarial robustness, Adversarial training, Bilevel optimization, Differentiable architecture search, Neural
architecture search.
I. INTRODUCTION
Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) have demonstrated sig-
nificant potential in various fields, particularly in the realm
of modern embedded systems for smart sensing [1]. This
field is dedicated to integrating physical sensing hardware
with advanced computational algorithms at the edge to in-
terpret complex environmental data and facilitate decision-
making [2], [3]. As a prime representative of such advanced
algorithms, DNNs have consequently become an indispens-
able computational component of these intelligent embedded
systems [4]. However, they are highly vulnerable to small
but carefully crafted input perturbations, known as adver-
sarial examples [5]–[7]. Specifically, the process of using
specific algorithms to generate adversarial examples to deceive
models is known as adversarial attacks. These examples can
significantly degrade model recognition accuracy, hindering
their application in safety-critical fields such as autonomous
driving and medical diagnosis [8]. For example, in autonomous
driving, Eykholt et al. demonstrated a physical attack. They
Jianwei Tai, Cheng Qian, Shuangning Yang and Kun Jing are
with the School of Internet, Anhui University, Hefei 230039, China
(e-mail: 24012@ahu.edu.cn; 2650096247@qq.com; realyangshuangn-
ing@gmail.com; jingkun@ahu.edu.cn). (Corresponding author: Kun
Jing.)
showed that pasting crafted stickers on a ”Stop” sign can
mislead the vehicle’s visual system [9]. As a result, the
system misclassifies the sign as a ”Speed Limit 45” sign [10].
Similarly, in medical diagnosis, research has identified risks in
X-ray analysis. Adding imperceptible perturbations to images
of malignant tumors can cause the model to misdiagnose
them as benign, thereby delaying patient treatment [11]. These
issues highlight the vulnerability of deep learning models
to adversarial attacks. Therefore, improving their adversarial
robustness is a critical issue.
Adversarial training (AT) is a primary defense method
against adversarial attacks. It incorporates adversarial exam-
ples during the training phase [12]. This process forces the
model to learn more robust features [13]. Consequently, the
model’s adversarial robustness is significantly improved. AT
is widely proven to be one of the most effective and reliable
strategies for enhancing model robustness [14], [15]. However,
research indicates that model architecture differences also play
a critical role in adversarial robustness [16], [17]. Current AT
methods mainly focus on optimizing model parameters [14],
[18]. They often overlook the critical impact of the architecture
itself. Therefore, defense strategies should not solely focus on
optimizing parameters for a fixed architecture. Architecture
design must also be considered.


2
IEEE SENSORS JOURNAL, VOL. XX, NO. XX, XXXX 2024
In this context, Neural Architecture Search (NAS) serves
as a technique for automating model architecture design [19].
It automatically explores vast design spaces. By doing so, it
discovers novel and efficient network architectures. Among
various NAS approaches, Differentiable Architecture Search
(DARTS) stands out as a representative framework based
on gradient optimization. It achieves high search efficiency
and superior performance compared to manually designed
models [20], [21]. However, existing DARTS-based strategies
optimize almost exclusively for accuracy on clean samples.
They fail to incorporate robustness into their search objec-
tives. This single-objective strategy poses challenges to their
reliability in safety-critical applications.
To address these limitations, we propose Adversarial
Differentiable Architecture Search, abbreviated as Adv-
DARTS. This is a robustness enhancement framework based
on adversarial differentiable architecture search. It integrates
adversarial training into the search process to further enhance
model robustness. Specifically, Adv-DARTS consists of two
stages: adversarial neural architecture search and adversarial
training.
The first stage is adversarial neural architecture search.
This stage builds upon Differentiable Architecture Search
(DARTS). It introduces adversarial examples to update archi-
tecture parameters. The goal is to automatically search for
model architectures that simultaneously achieve high perfor-
mance and adversarial robustness. Furthermore, to improve
search effectiveness, the framework introduces an adversarial
consistency penalty. This penalty minimizes the difference be-
tween the outputs of clean samples and adversarial examples.
After the search yields a fixed architecture, the adversarial
training stage begins. In this stage, the derived architecture
undergoes standard adversarial training, completing the entire
robustness enhancement pipeline.
Experimental results demonstrate that Adv-DARTS effec-
tively combines differentiable architecture search with adver-
sarial examples. It automatically discovers architectures with
superior robustness. Consequently, the effectiveness of adver-
sarial training is significantly enhanced, ultimately providing
more stable and reliable models for intelligent embedded
systems.
The main contributions of this paper are summarized as
follows:
1) We propose a novel framework named Adv-DARTS,
which introduces adversarial examples into neural ar-
chitecture search for the first time, guiding the search
process to discover more robust architectures.
2) We introduce an adversarial consistency penalty to
redesign the objective function of neural architecture
search, ensuring that the search process simultaneously
achieves high performance and adversarial robustness.
3) We develop an analytical method to investigate the ro-
bustness of different network architectures. This includes
visualizing adversarial examples within neural activation
layers, thereby enabling a preliminary analysis of their
impact.
II. METHODOLOGY
A. Overall Framework
As stated in the introduction, Adv-DARTS is a robustness
enhancement framework based on adversarial differentiable
architecture search. This framework primarily comprises two
stages: adversarial neural architecture search and adversarial
training.
The core of Adv-DARTS lies in the first stage. Here, we
formulate the adversarial architecture search as an iterative
bilevel optimization process. Specifically, this process involves
two alternating optimization loops. Both loops explicitly in-
corporate adversarial examples.
1) Outer Loop Optimization: We mix clean samples with
adversarial samples. We then perform architecture search
on this mixture to identify robust network architectures.
2) Inner Loop Optimization: We similarly mix adversar-
ial samples with clean samples. We use these samples
to optimize the model weights based on the current
architecture. These robust weights are then used to
update the architecture parameters.
These two optimization steps alternate to yield the final
network architecture. Furthermore, to enhance search stabil-
ity, we introduce an adversarial consistency penalty into the
optimization objective.
Upon completion of the search, we perform adversarial
training on the fixed architecture to obtain the final model.
In the following sections, we first introduce the generation
of adversarial examples. Then, we describe the adversarial
neural architecture search. Finally, we detail the loss functions.
The general framework of Adv-DARTS is illustrated in Fig. 1.
B. Adversarial Perturbation
1) Explanation of Adversarial Perturbation: The core of the
Adv-DARTS framework lies in integrating adversarial exam-
ples into the bilevel optimization process of differentiable
architecture search. To clearly understand the technical details
of this framework, we first need to clarify the mathematical
definition of the basic concept of adversarial perturbation.
Let θ denote the model parameters, x the clean input sample,
and y its corresponding label. The objective of an adversarial
attack is to find a perturbation δ that maximizes the model’s
loss function L on the adversarial sample x′.
To ensure the perturbation is visually imperceptible, δ must
be constrained within a set S. In many adversarial attacks, this
set S is defined by the L∞norm, with the constraint:
∥δ∥∞≤ϵ.
(1)
Here, δ is a perturbation tensor with the same dimensions as
the input x, and ϵ is a small positive scalar (referred to as the
perturbation radius). This constraint ensures that the absolute
value of each individual element in δ does not exceed ϵ.
Consequently, the objective of finding the optimal adversar-
ial perturbation δ∗can be formulated as:
δ∗= arg max
δ∈S
L(θ, x + δ, y).
(2)


AUTHOR et al.: PREPARATION OF PAPERS FOR IEEE TRANSACTIONS AND JOURNALS (MAY 2024)
3
Fig. 1.
Framework of Adv-DARTS. The left part of the figure shows the generation of adversarial samples from clean inputs by adding bounded
perturbations, iteratively updated via the gradient sign method. The center part highlights the evolution of normal and reduced cells under the
influence of architecture parameters α, from the initial stage to the final stage. On the right side, the training process is depicted, including the
addition of adversarial samples to the dataset, the introduction of a consistency penalty, parameter updates, and the final adversarial training
procedure.
After obtaining the optimal perturbation δ∗, the final adver-
sarial sample x′ is generated by adding it to the original input
x:
x′ = x + δ∗,
(3)
This is equivalent to:
x′ = x + arg max
δ∈S
L(θ, x + δ, y).
(4)
2) Generation of Adversarial Perturbations: In the Adv-
DARTS framework, we employ the following two attack
algorithms to generate adversarial perturbations.
The first method is the Fast Gradient Sign Method (FGSM)
[12]. FGSM is an efficient single-step attack method. It as-
sumes that the loss function L is locally linear around the input
x. Therefore, it estimates the perturbation by taking a step of
size ϵ in the direction of the gradient of the loss function with
respect to the input x. The calculation formula is as follows:
δ = ϵ · sign(∇xL(θ, x, y)).
(5)
Here, ϵ is the perturbation radius under the L∞constraint,
and sign(·) is the sign function.
The second method is Projected Gradient Descent (PGD)
[14]. PGD is a more powerful multi-step iterative attack
method. PGD is essentially an iterative version of FGSM. It
projects the result back onto the allowed perturbation space S
after each iteration to find a more optimal attack. The iterative
update process is as follows:
xt+1 = Πx+S

xt + α · sign(∇xL(θ, xt, y))

.
(6)
Here, xt+1 is the adversarial sample generated in the (t+1)-
th iteration, and α is the step size controlling the magnitude
of each gradient update. ∇xL(θ, xt, y) denotes the gradient of
the loss function at the current iteration point xt. Πx+S(·) is
a projection function. Its role is to ensure that the constraint
∥δ∥∞≤ϵ is always satisfied at every step.
C. Adversarial Neural Architecture Search
The core of the Adv-DARTS framework is adversarial
neural architecture search. It involves two key optimization
targets: network weights w (updated on the training set) and
architecture parameters α (updated on the validation set).
Compared with traditional DARTS, the key difference is that
Adv-DARTS generates adversarial examples at each iteration.
It also incorporates an additional penalty term into the loss
function to enhance the robustness of the discovered archi-
tecture against adversarial attacks. Our search space consists
of repeatedly stacked Normal Cells and Reduction Cells, and
Adv-DARTS aims to search for the optimal structures of these
two types of cells. In the following, we first review the basic
DARTS framework. Then, we introduce how to embed the
adversarial search into this structure.
1) Bilevel
Optimization
Framework:
In
the
traditional
DARTS framework, architecture search is a bilevel optimiza-
tion problem. This problem involves two nested optimization
objectives: the architecture parameters α in the outer loop and
the network weights w in the inner loop.
For fixed network weights w, the objective of the outer op-
timization is to find the optimal architecture α∗that minimizes
the loss on the validation set.
For a fixed architecture α, the objective of the inner opti-
mization is to find a set of optimal network weights w∗(α) on
the training set. These weights minimize the training loss.
This process of alternating updates for the architecture
parameters α and network weights w is expressed as:


4
IEEE SENSORS JOURNAL, VOL. XX, NO. XX, XXXX 2024
Fig. 2.
Illustration of the adversarial bilevel optimization loop in Adv-
DARTS. The upper section visualizes the construction of mixed sam-
ples, combining clean inputs (Dclean) and adversarial examples (Dadv)
in a 1:1 ratio. The central cycle depicts the alternating optimization
process: architecture parameters α are updated on the validation set
using the Adam optimizer, while network weights w are optimized on
the training set using SGD.
min
α
Lval(ω∗(α), α)
(7)
s.t. ω∗(α) = arg min
ω Ltrain(ω, α).
(8)
Here, the evaluation of the outer objective function Lval
depends on the optimal solution w∗(α) of the inner optimiza-
tion problem Ltrain. In other words, in the traditional DARTS
framework, the ultimate goal is to optimize the architecture
parameters α.
2) Adversarial Bilevel Optimization Framework: The funda-
mental goal of traditional DARTS is to find model architec-
tures with excellent performance. However, to ensure that the
searched architecture remains stable under adversarial attacks,
it is necessary to introduce adversarial examples during the
search phase. Specifically, we introduce adversarial constraints
into both the inner and outer loops of the bilevel optimization.
In the outer optimization of architecture parameters, we
introduce mixed samples (clean samples and adversarial sam-
ples) into the validation set. Based on the network weights
w updated from the inner optimization, we calculate the
loss function on the validation set. From this, we obtain the
gradient of the loss function with respect to the architecture
parameters α. Finally, we use the Adam optimizer to perform
a single update on the architecture parameters α.
In the inner optimization of network weights, we introduce
mixed samples into the training set. Based on the architecture
parameters α updated from the outer optimization, we calcu-
late the loss function on the training set. We then calculate
the gradient of the loss function with respect to the network
weights w via backpropagation. Finally, the network weights
w are updated by the SGD optimizer to obtain the weight
parameters for the outer optimization.
By simultaneously modifying both the inner and outer
loops, Adv-DARTS ensures that the process of weight learning
and architecture updates consistently aligns with the ultimate
goal of robustness. The adversarial bilevel optimization loop
of Adv-DARTS is illustrated in Fig. 2.
D. Details of Loss Functions
In the previous section, we presented the core idea of Adv-
DARTS: incorporating adversarial constraints into both the
inner and outer loops of the bilevel optimization. To realize
this mathematically, the key lies in the design of the loss
functions (Ltrain and Lval) for these two loops. This section
details the loss functions employed in Adv-DARTS.
1) Adversarial Consistency Penalty: To minimize the dis-
crepancy between clean and adversarial samples in the logits
space, we propose a regularization term named the Adversarial
Consistency Penalty. Specifically, we employ the ℓ1 norm to
quantify this difference [22]. A smaller ℓ1 norm indicates
that the model outputs of clean and adversarial samples are
closer. This helps reduce the sensitivity of the model to small
perturbations.
Let f(x; θ) denote the model output for input x. For a clean
sample x and its adversarial counterpart x′, we define:
LCons = λ · ∥f(x; θ) −f(x′; θ)∥1.
(9)
Here, λ controls the strength of the adversarial consistency
constraint. For a batch of size m, we can apply this regu-
larization by averaging or summing the penalty values over
all pairs (xi, x′
i). We then integrate this term into the total
loss function. This guides the learned model architecture to
be more robust against adversarial perturbations during the
neural architecture search process. The penalty term is jointly
optimized with other standard objective functions to form the
overall search objective.
2) Loss Function in Training Phase: In the traditional
DARTS training loop, each iteration involves sampling a batch
from the training queue and updating the network weights w
using Stochastic Gradient Descent (SGD). In Adv-DARTS,
the batch comprises two parts: clean samples x and their
corresponding adversarial examples x′. We concatenate the
clean and adversarial samples into a larger batch and randomly
shuffle them. This allows for joint training in a single forward
pass. The overall training loss function consists of the standard
cross-entropy loss and the adversarial consistency penalty. It
is mathematically expressed as:
Ltrain = LCE(z, y) + λ · ∥f(x; θ) −f(x′; θ)∥1.
(10)
Here, z denotes the logits output of the mixed samples, and
y represents the corresponding ground-truth labels. The cross-
entropy loss function LCE(z, y) aims to improve the classifi-
cation performance of the model. The adversarial consistency
penalty encourages the model to maintain consistency under


AUTHOR et al.: PREPARATION OF PAPERS FOR IEEE TRANSACTIONS AND JOURNALS (MAY 2024)
5
small perturbations. This ensures that during training, the net-
work simultaneously minimizes both the classification loss and
the consistency loss. Consequently, it accounts for standard
model performance while improving adversarial robustness.
3) Loss Function in Validation Phase: In Adv-DARTS, the
update of architecture parameters α relies on the validation set.
We generate adversarial examples during the validation phase
and construct the overall loss function. By minimizing this
loss function, the update of architecture parameters is guided
towards a more robust design.
To prevent the architecture parameters α, which are normal-
ized by the softmax function, from converging prematurely
to a single dominant operation, we introduce an entropy
regularization term into the loss function. This encourages the
distribution of α to maintain a certain degree of diversity. The
mathematical expression is:
λent ·
 
−
X
i
pi log pi
!
.
(11)
Here, λent controls the strength of the regularization, and
pi represents the probability of each candidate operation after
applying the softmax function. The entropy regularization term
encourages exploration by maintaining diversity in the search
space.
Similar to the training set, we also introduce the adversarial
consistency penalty into the validation loss function. Specif-
ically, the difference between the clean logits zclean val and
the adversarial logits zadv val is minimized. This helps build
a more robust architecture. The mathematical expression is:
λdiff · ∥zadv val −zclean val∥1.
(12)
Therefore, the overall objective function for updating archi-
tecture parameters α on the validation set can be formulated
as:
Ladv
val (α) = LCE(zval, yval)
+ λent ·
 
−
X
i
pi log pi
!
+ λdiff · ∥zadv val −zclean val∥1.
(13)
Here, zval denotes the logits output of the mixed validation
batch, and LCE(zval, yval) represents the standard cross-
entropy loss on the validation set. λent maintains the diversity
of α, and λdiff enforces consistency between clean and
adversarial samples in the validation set. Based on the above
loss function, the architecture parameters α are updated via
gradient descent as follows:
α ←α −ηα∇αLadv
val (α),
(14)
where ηα is the learning rate for α, and ∇αLadv
val (α) denotes
the gradient of the adversarial validation loss with respect to
α.
III. EXPERIMENTS
A. Experimental Settings
Datasets and Model Architectures. We evaluate the effec-
tiveness of our method on the CIFAR-10 dataset. CIFAR-10
consists of 10 classes, with 6,000 images per class. For data
preprocessing, we normalize the pixel values ranging from 0 to
255 to have zero mean and unit variance. This is implemented
for each channel (R, G, B) via the transformation x′ = x−µ
σ ,
where µ and σ denote the mean and standard deviation
calculated over the entire training dataset, respectively.
In terms of model architecture, the network is constructed
via neural architecture search. The initial number of channels
is set to 36. The network depth is dynamically adjusted across
three stages, increasing by 0, 6, and 12 layers, respectively.
The architecture search space comprises 14 edges, where
each edge is associated with candidate operations such as
convolution, pooling, and skip connections.
In these three stages, we retain the top-5, top-3, and top-
1 candidate operations with the highest weights, respectively.
Simultaneously, we prune the 3, 2, and 2 operations with lower
weights. In the final stage, all Zero operations are removed to
ensure the validity of the architectural connections.
Baseline Methods. We primarily compare our method with
two categories of baselines: (1) model architecture baselines,
including fixed-architecture networks, DARTS, and P-DARTS;
and (2) adversarial training baselines, including PGD-2-AT
and Fast-AT. For training, we set the perturbation budget to
ϵ =
16
255.
Search Details. To optimize the network weights, we
employ the SGD optimizer with a momentum of 0.9 and a
weight decay of 3×10−4. For the architecture parameters, we
utilize the Adam optimizer with momentum parameters set to
β1 = 0.5 and β2 = 0.999 [23]. We adopt a cosine annealing
schedule to dynamically adjust the learning rate during the
search process. The batch size is set to 96.
The search process is divided into three stages, each consist-
ing of 25 epochs. In each stage, the network weights are up-
dated for the first 10 epochs, while the architecture parameters
remain fixed. For the remaining epochs, the network weights
and architecture parameters are optimized in an alternating
manner. During the last 5 epochs of the process, we evaluate
the model’s performance on the validation set to assess the
quality of the searched architecture.
Training Details. We maintain the SGD optimization set-
tings and the cosine annealing scheduler from the search
phase. Additionally, we introduce a drop path rate that in-
creases linearly from 0 to a predefined maximum value over
the training epochs. We save model checkpoints every 50
epochs. The batch size is set to 128, and the model is trained
for a total of 600 epochs.
Evaluation Details. In the adversarial evaluation, we assess
robust accuracy using the same attack method employed
during the architecture search phase [24]. For an architecture
discovered via FGSM-based search, we perform both standard
and FGSM-based adversarial training on this architecture,
and then evaluate its robustness against FGSM attacks. We
also conduct an ablation study to investigate the individual


6
IEEE SENSORS JOURNAL, VOL. XX, NO. XX, XXXX 2024
TABLE I
PERFORMANCE OF ADV-DARTS. S AND T DENOTE STANDARD SEARCH
AND STANDARD TRAINING, RESPECTIVELY, WHILE ADVS AND ADVT
DENOTE ADVERSARIAL SEARCH AND ADVERSARIAL TRAINING.
NOTE
THAT ADVT
REPRESENTS
STANDARD
ADVERSARIAL
TRAINING ON THE FIXED ARCHITECTURE. DEF-ACC AND
CLEAN-ACC DENOTE THE ACCURACY ON ADVERSAR-
IAL AND CLEAN SAMPLES, RESPECTIVELY.
Models
PGD
FGSM
Def-Acc Clean-Acc Def-Acc Clean-Acc
T
0.51%
95.7%
19.7%
94.9%
AdvT
18.7%
87.4%
80.9%
85.4%
AdvS-T
0.58%
94.64% 25.47%
94.46%
Adv-PDARTS 23.55%
94.44% 92.53%
93.64%
Adv-DARTS
27.3%
93.56% 96.88%
93.24%
TABLE II
ABLATION STUDY. S AND T DENOTE STANDARD SEARCH AND STAN-
DARD TRAINING, RESPECTIVELY, WHILE ADVS AND ADVT DENOTE
ADVERSARIAL SEARCH AND ADVERSARIAL TRAINING. HERE, S-
ADVT REFERS TO ADVERSARIAL TRAINING PERFORMED ON
THE ARCHITECTURE DISCOVERED BY STANDARD SEARCH.
DEF-ACC AND CLEAN-ACC DENOTE THE ACCURACY
ON ADVERSARIAL AND CLEAN SAMPLES, RESPEC-
TIVELY.
Models
PGD
FGSM
Def-Acc Clean-Acc Def-Acc Clean-Acc
S-T
0.6%
96.24%
22.7%
95.95%
AdvS-T
0.58%
94.64% 25.47%
94.46%
S-AdvT
22.34%
94.34% 85.42%
93.57%
Adv-DARTS
27.3%
93.56% 96.88%
93.24%
contributions of architecture search and adversarial training
to model robustness. Furthermore, we evaluate the standard
accuracy of models under different experimental settings on
clean samples. It is worth emphasizing that, to ensure a fair
comparison, all methods are executed under identical settings
regarding batch size, epochs, and training hardware.
B. Experimental Results
Overall Performance of Adv-DARTS. On the CIFAR-
10 dataset, as shown in Table I, compared with baseline
methods(T), Adv-DARTS improves the defensive accuracy on
adversarial examples by 26.79% (PGD) and 77.18% (FGSM),
respectively. Compared with standard adversarial training
(AdvT), it improves by 8.6% (PGD) and 15.98% (FGSM),
respectively. Additionally, compared with AdvT, Adv-DARTS
improves the accuracy on clean samples by 6.16% (PGD) and
7.84% (FGSM). The experimental results demonstrate that,
compared with applying adversarial training on fixed archi-
tectures, the architecture searched by Adv-DARTS exhibits
significantly stronger adversarial robustness against PGD and
FGSM attacks after adversarial training. At the same time, it
incurs less loss in model performance.
As illustrated in Fig. 3, under PGD attacks, both Adv-
DARTS and the Standard Search with Adversarial Training
(S-AdvT) model achieve convergence in robust accuracy after
300 epochs. Notably, after convergence, the robust accuracy
Fig. 3.
Accuracy variation: PGD-based Adv-Search vs. Standard-
Search.
Fig. 4. Model Architecture.
of Adv-DARTS consistently outperforms that of the S-AdvT
model.
Ablation Study. As shown in Table II, we conducted an
ablation study to analyze the individual impacts of introducing
adversarial examples during the search and training phases of
Adv-DARTS.
First, we evaluated the impact of introducing adversarial
search alone (AdvS-T). The results indicate that without the
support of adversarial training, the adversarial architecture
alone (AdvS-T) cannot withstand PGD attacks. Its defensive
accuracy is only 0.58% (PGD) and 25.47% (FGSM), which is
comparable to the baseline (S-T) accuracy of 0.6% (PGD) and
22.7% (FGSM). This suggests that architecture optimization
alone is insufficient for improving adversarial robustness; it
must be coupled with adversarial training.
Second, we compared S-AdvT with Adv-DARTS. Under
identical adversarial training settings, Adv-DARTS achieves
defensive accuracies of 27.3% (PGD) and 96.88% (FGSM),
both significantly outperforming standard adversarial train-
ing (S-AdvT), which achieves 22.34% (PGD) and 85.42%
(FGSM). This proves that the architecture discovered by Adv-
DARTS possesses superior intrinsic robustness. This architec-
tural advantage enables the model to leverage the adversarial
training mechanism more fully, thereby achieving superior
robustness gains under identical training settings.
C. Adversarial Sensitivity Analysis
Activation Feature Visualization. We utilize hook func-
tions to capture the activation maps of each convolutional


AUTHOR et al.: PREPARATION OF PAPERS FOR IEEE TRANSACTIONS AND JOURNALS (MAY 2024)
7
Fig. 5. Activation Map in four states.
Fig. 6. Entropy Distribution in four states.
layer. This allows us to visualize the neural network. Specif-
ically, we first define a forward hook function to capture
and store the outputs of each layer. Then, we register this
hook to every convolutional layer in the network. When
test data are fed into the network for a forward pass, the
hooks are automatically triggered at each convolutional layer.
Consequently, the output values are captured and visualized
as activation maps.
As shown in Fig. 4, we utilized PGD-based Adv-Search and
Standard-Search to obtain their corresponding architectures.
Subsequently, as illustrated in Fig. 5, we performed adversarial
training on these two architectures to acquire their activation
maps when processing both adversarial and clean samples.
To analyze the impact of the two search methods on model
robustness, we employed multiple statistical metrics. Specifi-
cally, we utilized these activation values to compute the mean
and variance of each activation map matrix. Furthermore, we
discretized the activation values of each map to calculate the
corresponding entropy.
As presented in Fig. 6, for clean samples, the models
obtained by both search methods (Adv-Search and Standard-
Search) exhibit no significant differences in the distribution
of means, standard deviations, and entropy fluctuations of the
activation maps. However, for adversarial samples, the entropy
distribution of Standard-Search becomes dispersed, whereas
the distribution for Adv-Search is significantly more concen-
trated. This indicates that the model architecture derived from
adversarial search is less sensitive to variations in the input
distribution. In other words, the model can produce stable
outputs even when the input is severely perturbed. Based on
this observation, we infer that adversarial search contributes
to enhancing model robustness.
IV. CONCLUSION
In this paper, we have introduced a novel bilevel opti-
mization framework named Adv-DARTS, which is built upon
standard differentiable architecture search and designed to
enhance model robustness. By introducing adversarial per-
turbations during both the search and training phases, Adv-
DARTS ensures that the discovered architectures are intrin-
sically resistant to adversarial examples. Meanwhile, the in-
troduction of the adversarial consistency penalty enables the
framework to effectively balance performance and robust-
ness. Extensive experiments demonstrate that Adv-DARTS
achieves significant improvements in adversarial robustness
while well maintaining performance on clean samples. The
results indicate that the synergy between adversarial search
and adversarial training plays a pivotal role in improving
model robustness. Furthermore, sensitivity analysis reveals that
Adv-DARTS mitigates the sensitivity of activation values to
input perturbations, thereby yielding more stable and robust
feature representations. This stability is crucial for ensuring
the reliable operation of intelligent embedded sensing systems
deployed in unpredictable environments.
In future work, we plan to focus on integrating more
advanced adversarial strategies to further enhance model
robustness and adaptability. This may involve developing
more complex attack vectors to accurately simulate real-
world adversarial scenarios, thereby pushing the boundaries
of model resilience. Additionally, applying the adversarial
training paradigm to large-scale natural language process-
ing tasks, high-dimensional image recognition systems, or
real-time autonomous systems may yield new insights and
improvements. We also intend to evaluate the deployment
efficiency and computational overhead of these robust archi-
tectures on resource-constrained embedded sensing platforms,
thereby further bridging the gap between algorithmic defenses
and hardware-level reliability.
REFERENCES
[1] K. He, X. Zhang, S. Ren, and J. Sun, “Deep residual learning for
image recognition,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit.
(CVPR), Las Vegas, NV, USA, Jun. 2016, pp. 770–778.
[2] Y. Liu, M. Ping, J. Han, X. Cheng, H. Qin, and W. Wang,
“Neural network methods in the development of MEMS sensors,”
Micromachines, vol. 15, no. 11, Nov. 2024. [Online]. Available:
https://www.mdpi.com/2072-666X/15/11/1368
[3] A. A. Musa, A. Hussaini, W. Liao, F. Liang, and W. Yu, “Deep neural
networks for spatial-temporal cyber-physical systems: A survey,” Future
Internet, vol. 15, no. 6, p. 199, May 2023.


8
IEEE SENSORS JOURNAL, VOL. XX, NO. XX, XXXX 2024
[4] J. Schauer, P. Goodarzi, A. Sch¨utze, and T. Schneider, “Efficient hard-
ware implementation of interpretable machine learning based on deep
neural network representations for sensor data processing,” J. Sens. Sens.
Syst., vol. 14, no. 2, pp. 169–185, Aug. 2025.
[5] C. Szegedy, W. Zaremba, I. Sutskever, J. Bruna, D. Erhan, I. J.
Goodfellow, and R. Fergus, “Intriguing properties of neural networks,”
in Proc. 2nd Int. Conf. Learn. Represent. (ICLR), Banff, AB, Canada,
Apr. 2014. [Online]. Available: http://arxiv.org/abs/1312.6199
[6] N. Carlini and D. A. Wagner, “Towards evaluating the robustness of
neural networks,” in Proc. IEEE Symp. Secur. Privacy (SP), San Jose,
CA, USA, May 2017, pp. 39–57.
[7] N. Papernot, P. D. McDaniel, S. Jha, M. Fredrikson, Z. B. Celik, and
A. Swami, “The limitations of deep learning in adversarial settings,”
in Proc. IEEE Eur. Symp. Secur. Privacy (EuroS&P), Saarbr¨ucken,
Germany, Mar. 2016, pp. 372–387.
[8] D. Yin, K. Ramchandran, and P. L. Bartlett, “Rademacher complexity
for adversarially robust generalization,” in Proc. 36th Int. Conf. Mach.
Learn. (ICML), Long Beach, CA, USA, Jun. 2019, pp. 7085–7094.
[9] T.
B.
Brown,
D.
Man´e,
A.
Roy,
M.
Abadi,
and
J.
Gilmer,
“Adversarial patch,” CoRR, vol. abs/1712.09665, 2017. [Online].
Available: http://arxiv.org/abs/1712.09665
[10] K. Eykholt, I. Evtimov, E. Fernandes, B. Li, A. Rahmati, C. Xiao,
A. Prakash, T. Kohno, and D. Song, “Robust physical-world attacks
on deep learning visual classification,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput.
Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Salt Lake City, UT, USA, Jun. 2018, pp.
1625–1634.
[11] Y. Mirsky, T. Mahler, I. Shelef, and Y. Elovici, “CT-GAN: Malicious
tampering of 3d medical imagery using deep learning,” in Proc. 28th
USENIX Secur. Symp., Santa Clara, CA, USA, Aug. 2019, pp. 461–478.
[12] I. J. Goodfellow, J. Shlens, and C. Szegedy, “Explaining and harnessing
adversarial examples,” in Proc. 3rd Int. Conf. Learn. Represent.
(ICLR), San Diego, CA, USA, May 2015. [Online]. Available:
http://arxiv.org/abs/1412.6572
[13] A. Ilyas, S. Santurkar, D. Tsipras, L. Engstrom, B. Tran, and A. Madry,
“Adversarial examples are not bugs, they are features,” in Proc. Adv.
Neural Inf. Process. Syst. (NeurIPS), Vancouver, BC, Canada, Dec. 2019,
pp. 125–136.
[14] A. Madry, A. Makelov, L. Schmidt, D. Tsipras, and A. Vladu, “Towards
deep learning models resistant to adversarial attacks,” in Proc. 6th Int.
Conf. Learn. Represent. (ICLR), Vancouver, BC, Canada, Apr. 2018.
[15] T. Bai, J. Luo, J. Zhao, B. Wen, and Q. Wang, “Recent advances in
adversarial training for adversarial robustness,” in Proc. 30th Int. Joint
Conf. Artif. Intell. (IJCAI), Montreal, QC, Canada, Aug. 2021, pp. 4312–
4321.
[16] A. Liu, S. Tang, S. Liang, R. Gong, B. Wu, X. Liu, and D. Tao, “Ex-
ploring the relationship between architectural design and adversarially
robust generalization,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern
Recognit. (CVPR), Vancouver, BC, Canada, Jun. 2023, pp. 4096–4107.
[17] M. Guo, Y. Yang, R. Xu, Z. Liu, and D. Lin, “When NAS meets
robustness: In search of robust architectures against adversarial attacks,”
in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR),
Seattle, WA, USA, Jun. 2020, pp. 628–637.
[18] E. Wong, L. Rice, and J. Z. Kolter, “Fast is better than free: Revisiting
adversarial training,” in Proc. 8th Int. Conf. Learn. Represent. (ICLR),
Addis Ababa, Ethiopia, Apr. 2020.
[19] B. Zoph and Q. V. Le, “Neural architecture search with reinforcement
learning,” in Proc. 5th Int. Conf. Learn. Represent. (ICLR), Toulon,
France, Apr. 2017.
[20] H. Liu, K. Simonyan, and Y. Yang, “DARTS: Differentiable architecture
search,” in Proc. 7th Int. Conf. Learn. Represent. (ICLR), New Orleans,
LA, USA, May 2019.
[21] A. Heuillet, A. Nasser, H. Arioui, and H. Tabia, “Efficient automation
of neural network design: A survey on differentiable neural architecture
search,” ACM Comput. Surv., vol. 56, no. 11, pp. 270:1–270:36, 2024.
[22] H. Zhang, Y. Yu, J. Jiao, E. P. Xing, L. E. Ghaoui, and M. I. Jordan,
“Theoretically principled trade-off between robustness and accuracy,” in
Proc. 36th Int. Conf. Mach. Learn. (ICML), Long Beach, CA, USA,
Jun. 2019, pp. 7472–7482.
[23] D. P. Kingma and J. Ba, “Adam: A method for stochastic optimization,”
in Proc. 3rd Int. Conf. Learn. Represent. (ICLR), San Diego, CA, USA,
May 2015.
[24] F. Croce and M. Hein, “Reliable evaluation of adversarial robustness
with an ensemble of diverse parameter-free attacks,” in Proc. 37th Int.
Conf. Mach. Learn. (ICML), Virtual Event, Jul. 2020, pp. 2206–2216.
Jianwei Tai is currently a Lecturer with the
School of Internet, Anhui University, Hefei,
China.
His
research
interests
include
cy-
berspace security and artificial intelligence.
Cheng Qian is currently pursuing the master’s
degree with the School of Internet, Anhui Univer-
sity, Hefei, China. His research interests include
cyberspace security and artificial intelligence.
Shuangning Yang is currently pursuing the
master’s degree with the School of Internet,
Anhui University, Hefei, China. His research in-
terests include cyberspace security and artificial
intelligence.
Kun Jing is currently a Lecturer with the School
of Internet, Anhui University, Hefei, China. His
research interests include efficient model de-
sign, neural architecture search, model com-
pression, and large models.
